[[CHAPTER: Chapter 1]]

A MADISON SQUARE ARABIAN NIGHT

Carson Chalmers was in his apartment near the square when Phillips brought the evening mail. Among the usual letters, there were two with the same foreign postmark.

One parcel had a photograph of a woman. The other had a long letter from another woman. This letter was full of sweet but hurtful words about the woman in the photograph.

Chalmers tore the letter into many pieces and started pacing back and forth on his expensive rug. He was like a caged animal, full of doubt and worry.

After a while, he calmed down. The rug couldn't take him far, only sixteen feet. He needed to go three thousand miles, but the rug couldn't help with that.

Phillips appeared, as he always did, quietly and smoothly.

“Will you dine here, sir, or out?” he asked.

“Here,” said Chalmers, “and in half an hour.” He listened to the cold January wind blowing outside.

“Wait,” he said to Phillips, who was about to leave. “I saw many men standing in rows at the end of the square. One man was talking to them. Why are they there?”

“They are homeless men, sir,” said Phillips. “The man on the box tries to get them a place to sleep for the night. People give him money, and he sends as many men as he can to a lodging-house. That's why they stand in rows; they get sent to bed in order.”

“By the time dinner is served,” said Chalmers, “bring one of those men here. He will dine with me.”

“W-w-which—,” began Phillips, stammering for the first time.

“Choose one at random,” said Chalmers. “Make sure he is reasonably sober and somewhat clean. That's all.”

It was unusual for Carson Chalmers to act like this. But he felt that ordinary ways to feel better wouldn't work. He needed something different and exciting to lift his mood.

In half an hour, Phillips had done his work. The waiters from the restaurant below had brought up the delicious dinner. The dining table, set for two, looked warm and inviting with pink-shaded candles.

Phillips then brought in the shivering guest from the line of homeless men. The man looked like a wreck, like a ship damaged by fire. But there was still a little light in him. His face and hands were recently washed, as Phillips insisted on some cleanliness. In the candlelight, he looked out of place in the nice apartment. His face was pale and covered with a stubble like a red dog's fur. His hair was messy and long, shaped by a hat he always wore. His eyes were full of hopelessness and defiance, like a cornered dog. His shabby coat was buttoned high, but a bit of a collar showed above it. He seemed comfortable when Chalmers stood up from his chair.

“If you will oblige me,” said Chalmers, “I would be glad to have your company at dinner.”

“My name is Plumer,” said the guest in a rough voice. “If you're like me, you like to know who you're dining with.”

“I was going to say,” continued Chalmers quickly, “that mine is Chalmers. Will you sit opposite?”

Plumer sat down, and Phillips helped him with the chair. He seemed used to being served. Phillips set out the anchovies and olives.

“Good!” said Plumer; “going to be in courses, is it? All right, my cheerful ruler of Bagdad. I’m your storyteller all the way to the end. You’re the first real Caliph I’ve met since the cold weather started. What luck! I was forty-third in line. I had just finished counting when your man came to invite me to dinner. I had as much chance of getting a bed tonight as being the next President. How do you want the sad story of my life, Mr. Al Raschid—a chapter with each course or the whole story with the cigars and coffee?”

“The situation doesn’t seem new to you,” said Chalmers with a smile.

“By the prophet’s beard—no!” answered Plumer. “New York is full of cheap Haroun al Raschids. I’ve been asked for my story with a meal pointed at me many times. No one in New York gives you something for nothing! They mix curiosity and charity. Many will give you a dime and some food; a few will play Caliph with a steak; but they all want your life story. Oh, I know what to do when I see food coming my way in this city. I get ready to tell stories for my supper. I come from the late Tommy Tucker, who had to sing for his food.”

“I do not ask your story,” said Chalmers. “I tell you honestly that it was a sudden idea to have a stranger dine with me. I assure you, you will not suffer from my curiosity.”

“Oh, nonsense!” exclaimed the guest, enjoying his soup. “I don’t mind. I’m like an Oriental magazine ready with stories when the Caliph walks around. We in the homeless line have a sort of rate for this. Someone always wants to know why we are down in the world. For a sandwich and a beer, I say drink did it. For corned beef and cabbage, I tell the hard-hearted-landlord story. A steak and a bed gets the Wall Street tragedy. This is the first fancy meal I’ve had. I don’t have a story for it. I’ll tell you the truth if you’ll listen. It’s harder to believe than the made-up ones.”

An hour later, the guest leaned back, satisfied, while Phillips brought coffee and cigars and cleared the table.

“Did you ever hear of Sherrard Plumer?” he asked with a strange smile.

“I remember the name,” said Chalmers. “He was a painter, I think, quite famous a few years ago.”

“Five years,” said the guest. “Then I fell hard. I’m Sherrard Plumer! I sold my last portrait for $2,000. After that, I couldn’t find anyone to sit for a free picture.”

“What happened?” Chalmers couldn’t help asking.

“Funny thing,” answered Plumer, grimly. “I never quite understood it. For a while, I was doing well. I got into the high society and got many commissions. The newspapers called me a fashionable painter. Then strange things happened. When I finished a picture, people would look at it and whisper, looking strangely at each other.”

“I soon found out the problem. I had a knack for showing the hidden character of the person in the portrait. I don’t know how I did it—I painted what I saw—but it ruined me. Some sitters were very angry and refused their pictures. I painted a portrait of a beautiful and popular woman. When it was finished, her husband looked at it strangely, and the next week he sued for divorce.”

“I remember a banker who sat for me. While his portrait was in my studio, a friend of his came to see it. ‘Does he really look like that?’ he asked. I told him it was a faithful likeness. ‘I never noticed that look in his eyes before,’ he said; ‘I think I’ll change my bank account.’ He did, but the money was gone, and so was the banker.”

“It wasn’t long before I was out of business. People don’t want their secrets shown in a picture. They can smile and fool you, but the picture can’t. I couldn’t get another order, and I had to quit. I worked as a newspaper artist and then for a lithographer, but I had the same problem. If I drew from a photo, my drawing showed things you couldn’t see in the photo, but they were in the person. Customers got angry, especially the women, and I couldn’t keep a job. So I turned to drinking for comfort. Soon I was in the free-bed line, telling stories for food. Does the truth bore you, O Caliph? I can tell the Wall Street disaster story if you like, but that needs a tear, and I can’t cry after that good dinner.”

“No, no,” said Chalmers, earnestly, “you interest me very much. Did all your portraits show something bad, or were there some that didn’t?”

“Some? Yes,” said Plumer. “Children, many women, and enough men. Not everyone is bad, you know. When they were good, the pictures were good. I don’t explain it, but I’m telling you the truth.”

On Chalmers’s table lay the photograph he received that day. Ten minutes later, he had Plumer making a pastel sketch from it. After an hour, the artist stood up and stretched.

“It’s done,” he yawned. “Excuse me for taking so long. I got interested in the job. I’m tired. No bed last night, you know. I guess it’s good night now, O Commander of the Faithful!”

Chalmers went to the door with him and gave him some money.

“Oh! I’ll take it,” said Plumer. “All part of the fall. Thanks. And for the very good dinner. I’ll sleep well tonight and dream of Bagdad. I hope it won’t be just a dream in the morning. Farewell, most excellent Caliph!”

Again Chalmers paced on his rug. But he stayed far from the table where the pastel sketch lay. Twice, thrice, he tried to go near it but couldn’t. He could see the colors, but his fears kept him away. He sat down, trying to calm himself. Then he rang for Phillips.

“There is a young artist in this building,” he said. “—a Mr. Reineman—do you know where his apartment is?”

“Top floor, front, sir,” said Phillips.

“Go and ask him to come here for a few minutes.”

Reineman came quickly. Chalmers introduced himself.

“Mr. Reineman,” said he, “there’s a pastel sketch on that table. I’d like your opinion on its artistic value and as a picture.”

The young artist went to the table and picked up the sketch. Chalmers turned away, leaning on a chair.

“How—do—you find it?” he asked, slowly.

“As a drawing,” said the artist, “I can’t praise it enough. It’s the work of a master—bold, fine, and true. It puzzles me; I haven’t seen pastel work this good in years.”

“The face, man—the subject—the original—what would you say of that?”

“The face,” said Reineman, “is the face of one of God’s own angels. May I ask who—”

“My wife!” shouted Chalmers, turning and grabbing the surprised artist’s hand, shaking it. “She is traveling in Europe. Take that sketch, boy, and paint the picture of your life from it and leave the price to me.”