[[CHAPTER: Chapter 1]]

TWO THANKSGIVING DAY GENTLEMEN

There is one day that is ours. On this day, all Americans who are not self-made return to the old home to eat biscuits and notice how the old pump seems closer to the porch than before. Bless the day. President Roosevelt gives it to us. We hear some talk of the Puritans, but don’t really remember who they were. Bet we can beat them if they try to come back. Plymouth Rocks? Well, that sounds more familiar. Many of us have had to switch to chickens since the Turkey Trust did its work. But someone in Washington is leaking information to them about these Thanksgiving proclamations.

The big city east of the cranberry bogs has made Thanksgiving Day an institution. The last Thursday in November is the only day in the year when it recognizes the part of America across the ferries. It is a day of celebration, purely American.

Now for the story that will show you we have traditions here that are getting older faster than those in England—thanks to our energy and drive.

Stuffy Pete sat on the third bench to the right as you enter Union Square from the east, at the walk opposite the fountain. Every Thanksgiving Day for nine years he had sat there at 1 o’clock. Each time, things had happened to him—like in a Charles Dickens story, making his waistcoat swell above his heart and equally on the other side.

But today, Stuffy Pete’s appearance at the usual place seemed more from habit than from the yearly hunger that, as the philanthropists think, affects the poor at such long intervals.

Certainly, Pete was not hungry. He had just come from a feast that left him barely able to breathe and move. His eyes were like two pale gooseberries in a swollen, gravy-smeared face. His breath came in short wheezes; a roll of fat denied a fashionable set to his upturned coat collar. Buttons sewn on his clothes by kind Salvation fingers a week before flew like popcorn, scattering around him. He was ragged, with a split shirt front open to the wishbone; but the November breeze, carrying fine snowflakes, brought him only a welcome coolness. Stuffy Pete was full from a big dinner, starting with oysters and ending with plum pudding, and including (it seemed to him) all the roast turkey, baked potatoes, chicken salad, squash pie, and ice cream in the world. So he sat, stuffed, and looked at the world with after-dinner contempt.

The meal had been unexpected. He was passing a red brick mansion near the start of Fifth Avenue, where two old ladies of ancient family and respect for traditions lived. They even denied the existence of New York and believed Thanksgiving Day was declared only for Washington Square. One of their traditions was to have a servant at the gate to let in the first hungry person after noon and give him a big meal. Stuffy Pete happened to pass by on his way to the park, and the servants brought him in and kept the custom of the house.

After Stuffy Pete had looked straight ahead for ten minutes, he wanted a more varied view. With great effort, he moved his head slowly to the left. Then his eyes bulged out fearfully, his breath stopped, and his short legs wriggled and rustled on the gravel.

The Old Gentleman was coming across Fourth Avenue toward his bench.

Every Thanksgiving Day for nine years, the Old Gentleman had come there and found Stuffy Pete on his bench. The Old Gentleman was trying to make it a tradition. Every Thanksgiving Day for nine years, he had found Stuffy there, taken him to a restaurant, and watched him eat a big dinner. They do those things in England without thinking. But this is a young country, and nine years is not bad. The Old Gentleman was a strong American patriot and saw himself as a pioneer in American tradition. To become picturesque, we must keep doing one thing for a long time without stopping. Something like collecting weekly dimes in industrial insurance. Or cleaning the streets.

The Old Gentleman moved, straight and stately, toward the Institution he was building. Truly, the annual feeding of Stuffy Pete was not national, like the Magna Charta or jam for breakfast in England. But it was a step. It was almost feudal. It showed that a Custom was not impossible to New—America.

The Old Gentleman was thin, tall, and sixty. He was dressed all in black and wore old-fashioned glasses that wouldn’t stay on his nose. His hair was whiter and thinner than last year, and he seemed to use his big, knobby cane with the crooked handle more.

As his regular benefactor came up, Stuffy wheezed and shuddered like a woman’s over-fat pug when a street dog approaches. He would have run, but all the skill of Santos-Dumont could not have separated him from his bench. The servants of the two old ladies had done their work well.

“Good morning,” said the Old Gentleman. “I am glad to see that another year has spared you to move in health about the beautiful world. For that blessing alone, this day of thanksgiving is well proclaimed to each of us. If you will come with me, my man, I will provide you with a dinner that should make your physical being match the mental.”

That is what the Old Gentleman said every time. Every Thanksgiving Day for nine years. The words themselves almost formed an Institution. Nothing could be compared with them except the Declaration of Independence. Always before, they had been music in Stuffy’s ears. But now he looked up at the Old Gentleman’s face with tearful agony in his own. The fine snow almost sizzled when it fell on his sweating brow. But the Old Gentleman shivered a little and turned his back to the wind.

Stuffy had always wondered why the Old Gentleman spoke his speech rather sadly. He did not know it was because he wished every time that he had a son to succeed him. A son who would come there after he was gone—a son who would stand proud and strong before some future Stuffy, and say: “In memory of my father.” Then it would be an Institution.

But the Old Gentleman had no relatives. He lived in rented rooms in one of the old family brownstone houses in a quiet street east of the park. In the winter, he raised fuchsias in a small conservatory the size of a steamer trunk. In the spring, he walked in the Easter parade. In the summer, he lived at a farmhouse in the New Jersey hills and sat in a wicker armchair, speaking of a butterfly, the ornithoptera amphrisius, that he hoped to find someday. In the autumn, he fed Stuffy a dinner. These were the Old Gentleman’s activities.

Stuffy Pete looked up at him for half a minute, stewing and helpless in his own self-pity. The Old Gentleman’s eyes were bright with the pleasure of giving. His face was getting more lined each year, but his little black necktie was in as jaunty a bow as ever, and the linen was beautiful and white, and his gray mustache was carefully curled at the ends. Then Stuffy made a noise that sounded like peas bubbling in a pot. Speech was intended; and as the Old Gentleman had heard the sounds nine times before, he rightly understood them as Stuffy’s old acceptance.

“Thankee, sir. I’ll go with ye, and much obliged. I’m very hungry, sir.”

The fullness had not stopped Stuffy from realizing he was part of an Institution. His Thanksgiving appetite was not his own; it belonged by all the sacred rights of established custom, if not by the actual Statute of Limitations, to this kind old gentleman who had claimed it. True, America is free; but to establish tradition, someone must be a repeating decimal. The heroes are not all heroes of steel and gold. See one here that used only weapons of iron, badly silvered, and tin.

The Old Gentleman led his yearly guest southward to the restaurant and to the table where the feast always happened. They were recognized.

“Here comes the old guy,” said a waiter, “that treats that same bum to a meal every Thanksgiving.”

The Old Gentleman sat across the table glowing like a smoked pearl at his cornerstone of future ancient Tradition. The waiters filled the table with holiday food—and Stuffy, with a sigh mistaken for hunger, raised knife and fork and carved for himself a crown of imperishable bay.

No more valiant hero ever fought his way through the ranks of an enemy. Turkey, chops, soups, vegetables, pies, disappeared before him as fast as they could be served. Already full when he entered the restaurant, the smell of food almost made him lose his honor as a gentleman, but he rallied like a true knight. He saw the look of happy pleasure on the Old Gentleman’s face—a happier look than even the fuchsias and the ornithoptera amphrisius had ever brought to it—and he had not the heart to see it fade.

In an hour, Stuffy leaned back with a battle won. “Thankee kindly, sir,” he puffed like a leaky steam pipe; “thankee kindly for a hearty meal.” Then he rose heavily with glazed eyes and started toward the kitchen. A waiter turned him around like a top and pointed him toward the door. The Old Gentleman carefully counted out $1.30 in silver change, leaving three nickels for the waiter.

They parted as they did each year at the door, the Old Gentleman going south, Stuffy north.

Around the first corner, Stuffy turned and stood for one minute. Then he seemed to puff out his rags like an owl puffs out his feathers and fell to the sidewalk like a sunstruck horse.

When the ambulance came, the young surgeon and the driver cursed softly at his weight. There was no smell of whiskey to justify a transfer to the patrol wagon, so Stuffy and his two dinners went to the hospital. There they stretched him on a bed and began to test him for strange diseases, hoping to get a chance at some problem with the bare steel.

And lo! an hour later, another ambulance brought the Old Gentleman. And they laid him on another bed and spoke of appendicitis, for he looked good for the bill.

But soon, one of the young doctors met one of the young nurses whose eyes he liked and stopped to chat with her about the cases.

“That nice old gentleman over there, now,” he said, “you wouldn’t think that was a case of almost starvation. Proud old family, I guess. He told me he hadn’t eaten a thing for three days.”