[[CHAPTER: Chapter 1]]

A MADISON SQUARE ARABIAN NIGHT

Carson Chalmers is in his apartment.
Phillips brings the evening mail.
There are two items with the same stamp.

One parcel has a photo of a woman.
The other has a long letter from another woman.
The letter has hidden insults about the woman in the photo.

Chalmers tears the letter into tiny pieces.
He walks back and forth on his nice rug.
He feels trapped and full of doubt.

He calms down after a while.
The rug is only sixteen feet long.

Phillips appears like a well-oiled genie.

“Will you eat here or out?” he asks.

“Here,” says Chalmers, “and in half an hour.”
He listens to the cold wind outside.

“Wait,” he says to Phillips.
“As I came home, I saw many men standing in rows.
One man talks to them.
Why are they there?”

“They are homeless men,” says Phillips.
“The man tries to find them a place to sleep.
People give him money, and he sends them to a lodging-house.”

“By the time dinner is ready,” says Chalmers, “have one of those men here to eat with me.”

“W-w-which—,” begins Phillips, stammering for the first time.

“Choose one at random,” says Chalmers.
“Make sure he is sober and clean.
That is all.”

It is unusual for Carson Chalmers to act like a Caliph.
But that night, he needs something exciting and different.

In half an hour, Phillips finishes his duties.
The waiters bring up the delicious dinner.
The dining table, set for two, glows with pink candles.

Phillips brings in the shivering guest from the line of homeless men.

The man looks like a wreck.
His face and hands are freshly washed.
In the candlelight, he stands out in the neat apartment.
His face is pale, with stubble the color of a red dog's coat.
Phillips's comb can't tame his long, messy hair.
His eyes show hopeless defiance.
His shabby coat is buttoned high, but a bit of collar shows.
He isn't embarrassed when Chalmers stands up.

“If you will oblige me,” says Chalmers, “I will be glad to have your company at dinner.”

“My name is Plumer,” says the guest, in a harsh voice.
“If you’re like me, you like to know the name of the person you’re dining with.”

“I was going to say,” continues Chalmers quickly, “that mine is Chalmers. Will you sit opposite?”

Plumer sits down as Phillips slides the chair under him.
He seems used to dining at attended tables.
Phillips sets out the anchovies and olives.

“Good!” says Plumer; “going to be in courses, is it? All right, my jovial ruler of Bagdad.
I’m your Scheherezade all the way to the toothpicks.
You’re the first Caliph with a genuine Oriental flavor I’ve met since frost.
What luck! And I was forty-third in line.
I finished counting just as your man arrived to invite me to the feast.
I had little chance of getting a bed tonight.
How will you have the sad story of my life, Mr. Al Raschid—a chapter with each course or the whole edition with the cigars and coffee?”

“The situation does not seem new to you,” says Chalmers with a smile.

“By the chin whiskers of the prophet—no!” answers Plumer.
“New York’s full of cheap Haroun al Raschids.
I’ve been asked for my story with a meal twenty times.
Nobody in New York gives you something for nothing!
They spell curiosity and charity the same way.
Lots of them will give you a dime and chop-suey; a few will play Caliph with a steak; but they all want your story.
I know what to do when I see food coming in Bagdad-on-the-Subway.
I bow and get ready to tell stories for my supper.
I claim descent from Tommy Tucker, who sang for his supper.”

“I do not ask your story,” says Chalmers.
“It was a sudden whim to invite a stranger to dine with me.
You will not suffer from my curiosity.”

“Oh, fudge!” says the guest, enjoying his soup.
“I don’t mind it.
I’m a regular Oriental magazine with a red cover when the Caliph walks abroad.
We have a sort of union rate for this.
Someone always wants to know what brought us down.
For a sandwich and beer, I say drink did it.
For corned beef and coffee, I tell the hard-hearted-landlord story.
A steak and a bed gets the Wall Street tragedy.
This is the first spread like this I’ve had.
I’ll tell you the truth for this, if you’ll listen.
It’s harder to believe than the made-up ones.”

An hour later, the guest relaxes as Phillips brings coffee and cigars.

“Did you ever hear of Sherrard Plumer?” he asks, smiling strangely.

“I remember the name,” says Chalmers.
“He was a painter, I think, of some fame a few years ago.”

“Five years,” says the guest.
“Then I fell like a stone.
I’m Sherrard Plumer!
I sold my last portrait for $2,000.
After that, no one wanted a free picture.”

“What was the trouble?” Chalmers asks.

“Funny thing,” answers Plumer, grimly.
“I never quite understood it.
For a while, I was popular.
I broke into high society and got many commissions.
The newspapers called me a fashionable painter.
Then strange things happened.
When I finished a picture, people would whisper and look at each other.”

“I soon found out the trouble.
I had a knack for showing the hidden character in a portrait.
I don’t know how I did it—I painted what I saw—but it ruined me.
Some sitters were angry and refused their pictures.
I painted a beautiful society woman.
Her husband looked at it and soon sued for divorce.”

“I remember a banker who sat for me.
While his portrait was in my studio, an acquaintance saw it.
‘Does he really look like that?’ he asked.
I said it was a faithful likeness.
‘I never noticed that expression before,’ he said; ‘I think I’ll change my bank account.’
He did, but the bank account was gone, and so was the banker.”

“It wasn’t long before I was out of business.
People don’t want their hidden faults shown in a picture.
They can smile and deceive you, but the picture can’t.
I couldn’t get another order and had to give up.
I worked as a newspaper artist and for a lithographer, but had the same trouble.
If I drew from a photo, my drawing showed traits not in the photo, but probably in the original.
Customers complained, especially women, and I couldn’t keep a job.
So I turned to drinking for comfort.
Soon I was homeless, telling stories for food.
Does the truth bore you, O Caliph?
I can tell the Wall Street disaster story if you prefer, but it needs a tear, and I can’t manage one after that good dinner.”

“No, no,” says Chalmers, earnestly, “you interest me very much.
Did all of your portraits reveal something unpleasant, or were some fine?”

“Some were fine,” says Plumer.
“Children, many women, and enough men.
Not everyone is bad.
When they were good, the pictures were good.
I don’t explain it, but I’m telling you facts.”

On Chalmers’s table lies the photograph he received that day.
Ten minutes later, Plumer is making a sketch from it in pastels.
After an hour, the artist stretches wearily.

“It’s done,” he yawns.
“Excuse me for taking so long.
I got interested in the job.
I’m tired.
No bed last night, you know.
Guess it’s good night now, O Commander of the Faithful!”

Chalmers walks with him to the door and slips some bills into his hand.

“Oh! I’ll take them,” says Plumer.
“That’s included in the fall.
Thanks for the very good dinner.
I shall sleep well tonight and dream of Bagdad.
I hope it won’t be just a dream in the morning.
Farewell, most excellent Caliph!”


[[CHAPTER: Chapter 2]]

Chalmers walked back and forth. He stayed away from the table.

He tried to go near it but couldn't. He saw the colors, but he was afraid.

He sat down, then called for Phillips.

"There is a young artist here," he said. "A Mr. Reineman—do you know his room?"

"Top floor, front, sir," said Phillips.

"Go ask him to come here."

Reineman came quickly. Chalmers introduced himself.

"Mr. Reineman," he said, "there is a sketch on that table. I want your opinion on it."

The young artist picked up the sketch. Chalmers turned away.

"How do you find it?" he asked.

"As a drawing," said the artist, "it's very good. It's the work of a master. I haven't seen work this good in years."

"The face—the person—what do you say?"

"The face," said Reineman, "is like an angel. May I ask who—"

"My wife!" shouted Chalmers. He shook the artist's hand. "She is in Europe. Paint a picture from it. I will pay you."